# Internationalization

Zoia is a multi-language system out of the box. [Lingui](https://lingui.js.org/) is used as a main library for internationalization of the Admin panel. User space uses plain JSON files.

All Admin panel messages are compiled to the centralized catalogs:

* *src/shared/react/locales/admin*

## Adding a new locale

To add a new locale, you may need to run the following script:

`npm run add-locale` (where *xx* is your locale)

The corresponding directories will be created under the *src/shared/react/locales/admin*.

Then you will need to extract the existing messages into your *messages.po* files. To do so, run the following script:

`npm run extract`

After that, the messages which you will need to translate will be put into *messages.po* file. Translate the required messages and compile them using

`npm run compile`

You will need to re-compile your messages and Zoia each time you make any changes to the message catalogs.

When finished, recompile your Zoia instance to include the latest changes to your message catalogs:

`npm run build`

## Administration Area

The Admin panel is built using React so the Lungui.js is natively supported there. You may use all Lingui features to access your messages, and the messages are extracted from your code automatically.

Example:

```javascript
import { I18n } from '@lingui/react';
import { Trans, t } from '@lingui/macro';

...

render = () => (
    <I18n>
        {({ i18n }) => {
            return (<>
                <Trans>New Page</Trans>
                {i18n._(t`Hello world`)}
            </>);
        }}
    </I18n>
);
```

See more examples in default modules like *pages* or *users*.

## User Space

The user space scripts are using just flat JSON files for an internationalization purpose. This is required because the web server is actually an isomorphic application and needs to be adopted for both client and server side.

The directories where an user space internationalization files are located in should be as follows: *user/locales* (under a module root). Each locale has it's own file, e.g. *en.json*, *ru.json* etc.

A format of each JSON file is a plain key-value list. If no translation is required, a value may be left an empty string.

Example (*ru.json* for *yourmodule*):

```json
{
    "Authorize": "Авторизация",
    "Username": "Имя пользователя",
    "Password": "Пароль"
}
```

To use the translation in your user space module, you need to include the i18n library:

```javascript
import i18n from '../../../../shared/marko/utils/i18n-node';

const t = i18n('yourmodule')['en'];
console.log(t['Authorize']); // Авторизация
```

## Helper Scripts

Zoia has several helper scripts which can automate most of your internationalization tasks.

### Add a New Locale (Admin area)

To add a new locale, run 

`npm run add-locale-admin` (where *xx* is your locale)

`npm run add-locale-user` (where *xx* is your locale)

### Extract Messages (Admin area)

To extract all messages from every module, run

`npm run extract`

### Compile Messages (Admin area)

To make your messages available to the built modules, run:

`npm run compile`

(you will also need to rebuild Zoia to append your changes)

### Split Messages (Admin area)

To distribute a module, you will need to extract your messages from the shared messages catalog to the *locales* directory of your module. To do so, run:

`npm run split-locales`

### Combine Messages (Admin area)

If you wish to include a new module to your Zoia instance, you will need to merge the message catalog of a module into the shared messages catalog. To do so, run:

`npm run combine-messages`

You will also need to recompile the shared messages catalog using `npm run compile` and rebuild your Zoia instance to apply changes.